Add Initial version of TAG Operational Resilience charter (#1772)
cncf/toc: tags/tag-operational-resilience/charter.md

# TAG Operational Resilience Charter

Review and contributions from: [Rafa Brito](https://github.com/brito-rafa), [Mario Fahlandt](https://github.com/mfahlandt), [Nabarun Pal](https://www.github.com/palnabarun), [Saiyam Pathak](https://github.com/saiyam1814), [Raffaele Spazzoli](https://github.com/raffaelespazzoli) and [Matt Young](https://github.com/halcyondude)

## Introduction

In today's digital landscape, the resilience and efficient operation of cloud native systems are both a technical requirement and necessity for widespread adoption. 
As organizations globally adopt and deploy on cloud native architectures to deliver their services, the impact of downtime or performance degradation can have widespread ramifications if not addressed and dually considered in the projects being adopted for production-level use. 

> This Technical Advisory Group [(TAG)](https://github.com/cncf/toc/blob/main/governance/tag-governance.md) is established to address the complex challenges of maintaining system availability, performance, and reliability. By focusing on "Day 2 Operations," the period after a system is deployed, this TAG aims to provide the community with the principles, practices, and tools needed to build and operate robust and efficient cloud native services. The TAG serves as an extension of the CNCF TOC for this domain area and supports the TOC with project due diligences, additional reviews, and requests within the scope of the TAG.

Author: ```suggestion
This Technical Advisory Group [(TAG)](https://github.com/cncf/toc/blob/main/governance/tag-governance.md) is established to address the complex challenges of maintaining system availability, performance, and reliability. By focusing on "Day 2 Operations," the period after a system is deployed, this TAG aims to provide the community with the principles, practices, and guidance needed to build and operate robust and efficient cloud native services. The TAG serves as an extension of the CNCF TOC for this domain area and supports the TOC with project due diligences, additional reviews, and requests within the scope of the TAG.
```

## Mission Statement

> To define and advance practices and standards for building, operating, adopting and managing resilient, observable, and efficient cloud native systems, applications, and architectures beyond their initial deployment. 

Reviewer: I think we should expand on this, as a LOT is covered.  

The TAG's primary goals are defined in [governance/tag-governance.md#goals](https://github.com/cncf/toc/blob/main/governance/tag-governance.md#goals). Our Mission should reflect these:

> ### Goals
> 
> - Strengthen the project ecosystem to meet the needs of end users and project
>   contributors.
> - Serve as a “bridge” between projects to surface common problems and drive
>   alignment.
> - Identify gaps in the CNCF project portfolio. Find and attract projects to fill
>   these gaps.
> - Reduce some project workload on TOC while retaining executive control & tonal
>   integrity with this elected body.
> - Provide technical expertise during the evaluation of projects to join the CNCF
>   and as they move levels.
> - Educate and inform users with unbiased, effective, and practically useful
>   information scoped to cloud native.
> - Focus attention & resources on helping foster project maturity, systematically
>   across CNCF projects.

Here's a potential starting point taken from the Observability Charter we could adapt.

> - Foster and grow the ecosystem of observability related projects, users, and maintainers.
> - Identify and report gaps in the CNCF's project portfolio on topics of observability to the TOC and the wider CNCF community.
> - Collect, curate, champion, and disseminate patterns and current best practices related to the observation of cloud-native systems that are effective and actionable.
> - Educate and inform users with unbiased, accurate, and pertinent information.
> - Educate and help other CNCF projects in regarding observability techniques and practices available within the CNCF.
> - Provide and maintain a vendor-neutral venue for relevant thought validation, discussion, and project feedback.
> - Provide a ladder for community members to become involved with the technical oversight of projects within the TAG's scope in an open, transparent, and inclusive way.

## Responsibilities & Deliverables

### In-Scope

This TAG covers the following sub-domains and topics within its scope:

* **Observability:** Monitoring, logging, and tracing to gain deep insights into system behavior and health.
* **Management:** The processes and tools essential for managing the complete lifecycle of cloud native applications.

> * **Business Continuity:** Strategies and practices to ensure that business operations can continue in the event of a disruption.

Author: This is an interesting point, as we took the main points out of the draft Charter which was provided to us by the TOC and is listed as a scope point. [Draft Charter by CNCF](https://docs.google.com/document/d/1bDAIevQ_69bV1gnpDRgrxNubhyazf8flRWYgkKAf5jA/edit?tab=t.0#heading=h.z7nikj46tsbw) listed in the [nomination issues](https://github.com/cncf/toc/issues/1664)

What ruling should we now follow here?

> * **Business Continuity:** Strategies and practices to ensure that business operations can continue in the event of a disruption.

Reviewer 2: Where we can, we try to distinguish the technology specific impacts than from those of entities themselves. Guidance on how cloud native "hot sites" or regional failover can assist in DRP is generally fine and how it can support BCP is too. However we want to ensure we're not advising specifically on BCP, except where it applies to cloud native technologies. Perhaps that is the distinction to be made here?

I recognize this was in the draft template, and it should have been corrected. Having drafted them, no matter how many times I reread it I didn't catch it until this PR. My apologies for the confusion this may have caused.

Cc: @angellk @kevin-wangzefeng  , what are your thoughts?

* **Resource Optimization:** The efficient use of computational, storage, and network resources to balance performance and cost. 
* **Cost Efficiency:** Methodologies for optimizing expenditures without compromising system reliability or performance. 
* **Energy Efficiency:** Focusing on and providing guidance for reducing the energy consumption of cloud native services.
* **Performance:** Ensuring the speed, responsiveness, and stability of cloud native applications under various load conditions.
* **Troubleshooting:** The systematic process of identifying, diagnosing, and resolving issues within a distributed system.

> * **Testing:** Verifying the reliability and resilience of applications

Author: @halcyondude can you make a suggestion

> * **Testing:** Verifying the reliability and resilience of applications

Reviewer 2: @halcyondude the language in the TAG observability charter appears to be too detailed and may inhibit scoping of efforts for the TAG. Is there anything within the previous charter that is acutely missing from this listing so it may be added?

> * **Performance:** Ensuring the speed, responsiveness, and stability of cloud native applications under various load conditions.

Author: ```suggestion
* **Performance:** Ensuring the system in question accomplishes its intended tasks and functions by measuring and monitoring the speed, efficiency, reliability, and consistency of how it achieves them. A nuanced understanding of system behavior (performance) is required for effectively managing variability and volume of workloads and traffic. This then can inform technical strategy and business continuity planning.
```

* **Reliability:** The ability of a system to perform its required functions under stated conditions for a specified period of time.
* **Day 2 Ops:** A focus on the post-deployment activities required to keep a system running smoothly, including maintenance, scaling, updating and upgrading.
* **Chaos Engineering:** The practice of experimenting on a system to build confidence in its capability to withstand turbulent and unexpected conditions.

> * **Conformance Programs:** Relevant ownership and development of conformance programs to help end users adapt and choose platforms and tools that adhere to established operational resilience standards

Reviewer 2: Conformance programs usually have a certification element to them. That (certification) is out of scope correct?

Author: Yes certification itself always is in the hand of CNCF, as far as it is stated in the [conformance projects by CNCF](https://github.com/cncf/foundation/blob/main/conformance-programs.md) maybe we should just add the rel to this doc

Reviewer 2: That's would be great if you could add that. Thank you!

Author: @mfahlandt add reference to conofrmance

> * **Testing:** Verifying the reliability and resilience of applications
> * **Reliability:** The ability of a system to perform its required functions under stated conditions for a specified period of time.
> * **Day 2 Ops:** A focus on the post-deployment activities required to keep a system running smoothly, including maintenance, scaling, updating and upgrading.
> * **Chaos Engineering:** The practice of experimenting on a system to build confidence in its capability to withstand turbulent and unexpected conditions.

Author: ```suggestion
* **Testing:** Verifying the reliability and resilience of applications
  * **Reliability:** The ability of a system to perform its required functions under stated conditions for a specified period of time.
  * **Day 2 Ops:** A focus on the post-deployment activities required to keep a system running smoothly, including maintenance, scaling, updating and upgrading.
  * **Chaos Engineering:** The practice of experimenting on a system to build confidence in its capability to withstand turbulent and unexpected conditions.
```

### Out of Scope

> * This TAG will collaborate with other TAGs on overlapping areas, but will not primarily focus on topics explicitly owned by different TAGs

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
* Topics in scope of other tags (collaboration on such topics with other TAGs where it touches on this TAG's charter is in scope)
```
the wording on this is strange.

* Form an umbrella organization beyond the CNCF
* Evaluate individual company infrastructures and provide advice
* Focus outside of cloud native technologies, according to the [CNCF Cloud Native definition](https://github.com/cncf/toc/blob/main/DEFINITION.md)

> 

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
* creation of certifications for Conformance
```

## Deliverables to TOC

The anticipated deliverables for TAG Operational Resilience include:

* **Subprojects:** Ongoing services or programs requiring stewardship from the TAG. Examples include:
  * Production Readiness Assessments
  * Resource Optimization and Green Reviews
* **Initiatives:** Time-bound, objective-focused units of work submitted to the TOC. Examples may include:
  * Specific assessments for Resource Optimization or Cost Efficiency best practices
  * Guidelines for performance testing best practices
* **Whitepapers and Guides:** In-depth documents that provide frameworks and guidelines consistent with advancing practices in the TAG's scope. These serve projects, other TAGs, and the TOC. 

> * **Landscape Analysis:** A curated view of the projects, tools, and standards within the operational resilience ecosystem, similar to the Cloud Native Landscape, to identify gaps and opportunities.

Reviewer 2: I presume the output of which is to inform the Cloud Native Landscape, not duplicate it correct?

> * **Knowledge Gap Identification:** Reports and presentations to the TOC on identified gaps within the cloud native ecosystem related to operational resilience. 

Reviewer 2: Just knowledge gaps? or knowledge, tooling, guidance, and capability gaps?

Reviewer: I think it makes sense to move this up to the Mission statement and elaborate on it there.

Author: @halcyondude can you move this up to the mission statement as discussed

* **Suggestions for improvements:** Recommend improvements for CNCF internal processes. Examples include suggestions for:
    * New educational initiatives, such as for sustainability.
    * Centralized conformance and supply chain tooling for projects.

> * **Conformance Programs**: Supporting the creation of, and providing oversight for, conformance programs that fall within the TAG's scope. These programs help ensure the quality and resilience of vendor and project software in the CNCF landscape.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
* **Conformance Programs**: Supporting the creation of, and providing oversight for, conformance programs that fall within the TAG's scope. These programs help ensure the quality and resilience projects in the CNCF landscape.
```
As a TAG, the outputs should focus on the projects and adopters of technology, not on vendor specific software. the suggested verbiage will make this more explicit.

> * Project Reviews and Due-dilligence: The TAG will support TOC with the due diligence activities pertaining to the scope of the TAG.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
* Project reviews and due diligence: The TAG will support TOC with the due diligence activities pertaining to the scope of the TAG.
```

## Audiences

> * **End Users & Developers:** End users, developers, and system operators will benefit from educational materials, best practices, and tools that help them build and maintain more resilient systems.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
* **Adopters, Developers, and Operators:** Adopters, developers, and system operators will benefit from educational materials, best practices, and tools that help them build and maintain more resilient systems.
```
End Users (Capitalized like this) refers to end user members of the CNCF. End users (with the lower case) generally refers to entities that do not monetize cloud native projects.  By using the term "adopters" we encompass all three of these entity types.
